---
title: Games- Crackdown & Jumping on a Bargain
date: '2018-06-18T19:01:41-06:00'
image: /img/uploads/crackdown-1.jpg
showonlyimage: 'false'
---
_6/7/19- Newsflash: Crackdown 3 has been delayed to February 2019. Confirmed by Microsoft after the leaked info was published by Kotaku's Jason Schreier the morning of June 7th. _

_Below is my structurally wonky take on the importance and made up origin story of the original Crackdown: _

The original Crackdown's release on Xbox 360 in February of 2007 drew the interest of the gamer's with the promise of a true to form next-gen superhero experience... oh, and an invitation to the Halo 3 multiplayer beta. While many players would have happily paid 60 of their hard-earned dollars on the simple chance to kill their buddies on a couple Halo 3 maps I financially free at the time. Pushing 11 years old and my gaming priorities existed on the bottom row of my local game chain's shelves. To clarify, I'm talking about the cheap stuff.  

Fast forward to early 2008 and pretty much every gaming merchant in town had dozens of copies of Crackdown lining the shelves of their used Xbox 360 section, each of them marked with an invitation to a Halo 3 Beta long since passed. One fateful day I walked out with a copy for under the $10 mark, and while I was often disappointed by these impulse purchases spurred on by a few dollars in my pocket, Crackdown clicked. I knew there was something different from the usual AA games I found for a deal. I knew the second I commanded my semi-custom character to dive into the front seat of my cell shaded speed machine fly off a ramp and onto the mean streets of Pacific City. 

The driving was arcady and the draw distance brought on by the cell shaded gave it a next generation edge. At a time when there was no new Grand Theft Auto yet to tell us how it was supposed to be, Crackdown did a fair job of making it fun to navigate the world in vehicles, and later throw said vehicles at bad guys. Combat got better with the time you sunk in. While the encounters never felt incredibly dynamic, gaining more powerful abilities and wasting dudes with little effort was fun. With all that said, the special sauce that was OG Crackdown came in the form of jumping. In fact I'm pretty sure Crackdown is a Microsoft executive team's response to the question of "What would Mario look like on Xbox?" 

Collect-a-thon games were novel in the first generation of 3D platformers. Gamers were interested in finding or simply running through wumpa fruit, bananas, and coins driven by the joy moving their characters in a space that wasn't flat. Enter the world the Next-Next gen and reinvention was needed to make platforming in 3D fun again. Somehow the folks making Crackdown at Realtime Worlds nailed it. Developer 1 looked to Developer 2 and said the phrase that would make the game fun and memorable, "We gotta make it so when you get coins, you jump higher." That was the key. Simple as that. Because when you had slick new  Xbox 360 waiting to show you what it could do, Crackdown made us OCD collectors of stuff ask ourselves the question, "how high can I go?" 

Not to over-inflate the significance of Crackdown but I do believe that when you strip down our favorite plumber's adventures to their basic mechanics you'll find Mario is primarily made up of jumping, collecting stuff, and gaining special abilities. Now let's take a closer look at Crackdown. We've already established that the pairing of jumping and collecting is genius, while keeping the formula distinctly Xbox. The main narrative thrust of the game is taking down different gangs across Pacific City. You've got a diverse set of colorful baddies to dispatch, and at the end of the day shooting dudes in the face with an assortment of weapons is just the Xbox way, leave bopping Goombas on the head to the other guys. 

Overall Crackdown was a load of fun to play. It quelled our desire for the imminent release of Grand Theft Auto IV. At the height of achievement hunting, the developer nailed the connection between hunting down power orbs having a real gameplay impact while also feeding the meta game of the time that was Xbox Gamer Score. While the franchise was never became a pillar of Xbox like it should have, I still think back fondly on those days of searching for enough orbs to throw a van, or jump to the top of a skyscraper.
